---
title: "TURNS 4-6: THE MIDDLE GAME"
date: 2025-12-02
layout: splash
classes: wide
permanlink: /mid_game/
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/cpdh.phg
excerpt: "Adam breaks down how to navigate and think about the Middle Game."
---

Forgive my indulgence: I’ll make my claim that **The Mid-Game** is the most exciting part of any multiplayer game, especially in cPDH. This stage brings out the uniqueness of multiplayer game theory more than any other. When you combine these dynamics with cPDH’s framework… In my 25 years of playing Magic, there’s truly nothing sweeter than this.

## Negotiate to Live

> “Let us build bridges, not walls.”
> — <cite>Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929-1968)</cite>

Though an experienced player would keep their opponents’ actions in sight at all times, it’s during The Mid-Game where most players’ attention is able to shift from their own development to their opponents’ actions. By now, mana bases, early tutors, and core board states should be set. With their houses in order, players should have enough information to start to make decisions to act against one another. 

Newton’s third law of motion states that for every action, there’s an equal and opposite reaction. 

With multiple players armed and ready at the table, how players react to one another’s actions affects who lives or dies. This is where the art of negotiation comes into play. 

In multiplayer games of Magic: the Gathering, our ability to negotiate correlates to our ability to win. The question most players ask: *How do I get to the place where I can win the game?* Statistically speaking, that place is **The Late Game**. Negotiating with your opponents is the key to getting there. 

## Negotiating: Its Meaning and Function

Let’s get some clarity: what do we mean by Negotiating? Let's define it as **"the ability to reason with others effectively to come to agreeable terms."**

Notice how I didn’t say ‘sales’ or ‘politics’… both of those words carry negative connotations that are often placed by frustrated, lesser-skilled practitioners. Effective negotiation comes from excellent communicative skills and shrewd actions. It also stems from the ability to understand your own needs and the needs of your opponents. 

> “If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. If you know yourself but not the enemy, for every victory gained you will also suffer a defeat. If you know neither the enemy nor yourself, you will succumb in every battle.”
> — <cite>Sun Tzu (554-496 BCE)</cite>

In a future article, we will explore tactics of negotiation and attempt to give the subject matter the wide berth that it deserves. For now, at surface, we’ll admire the beautiful gift we’ve all been given in the Mid-Game: we now have both player awareness and a developed game state, one that each of us are able to color however we see fit. Become a beautiful painter, and an even better art critic.

> “The vulgar crowd is always taken by appearances, and the world consists chiefly of the vulgar.”
> — <cite>Niccolo Machiavelli (1469-1527)</cite>

I’ll advise everyone to pay close attention in negotiations:
* What does each player say or do…?
* What nonverbal queues (or clues) are they providing you?
* **A great giveaway:** How and to whom is damage placed?

## Segue: The Role of Damage

In order to continue, I’ll ask the reader to consider the role of Damage as a negotiation tactic rather than its surface value of trying to make someone ‘lose’ points. We’re not playing for ‘points’ necessarily until there’s only one opponent left… and when there’s only one opponent left, there’s no one left to negotiate with. 

With multiple opponents at your table, embrace the following paradigm shift around damage:
1. **Damage is a leverage tool against longevity.**
2. **Combat damage is leverage against longevity, with options.**

In combat, the defending player can either lessen their longevity or lose potentially damaging permanent(s) to preserve longevity.

The biggest enemy of longevity is what I call a **Noisy Weapon**. Noisy weapons draw significant negative attention to themselves in exchange for speed. They paint themselves red, asking ‘have a solution or perish to me.’ This form of self-inflicted target painting (whether intended or not) writes a losing social contract from the wielder to the table, making all others feel vulnerable in negotiations against them. 

**Some examples of noisy threats include:**
* Infect
* Early Combo Pieces
* Notorious Commanders

On paper, these aggressive strategies present a bold and swift path to secure victory. The irony is the insecurity felt by other players is met in stride to the wielder; when their weapons are revealed and they become a noisy focal point and scapegoat at the table. When this happens, their asset becomes a liability; the wielder of a noisy weapon is placed at a terrible disadvantage diplomatically, as they are often treated as public enemy number one.

Until ‘the threat’ has been minimized or deflected, players will often seek security in one another, coalescing against the wielder. If you are ostracized in this way at the Mid-Game, you significantly decrease your chances of making it into The Late Game with the rest of them. Additionally, the wielder is placed on the backfoot if their opponents’ have more combined interaction available to match the wielder’s threat protection.

### Exception to the Rule
Some decks in the format seek to create an environment where they can afford to simply not care about their ability to negotiate with the table. The most successful of these are the “Mean Decks” that oppress the table’s ability to interact. By doing so, they aren’t as vulnerable to retaliation from their opponents.

> “(Opponents) ought either to be caressed or crushed; for if you merely offend them, they take vengeance, but if you injure them greatly they are unable to retaliate.”
> — <cite>Niccolo Machiavelli (1469-1527)</cite>

Previous builds of **Hollow Marauder** and occasionally, **Abdel-Black** are two examples that come to mind that consistently incorporate these tactics. Choosing to pilot these noisy decks comes with inherent social contracts; they have built their own noisy reputation(s) which are exposed to the table on Turn 0.

## Returning from our Segue

In the Mid-Game is where dialogue becomes the most interactive as each opponents’ boards and hands have developed into tangible threats. A cunning player will use this information to negotiate their way to The Late Game. Those who don’t, tend to be eliminated before the rest. Some would argue that the first eliminated player is often considered the least necessary ally for each player to win, or, is the clear and present danger to all three players equally at the table.

## In Closing

Ignore the power of negotiation at your own risk, for a table with three opponents and no allies in the Mid-Game will most likely decrease one’s chance of reaching the Late Game, and in turn, dramatically increase the odds of one’s own demise.

{% include article-nav.html %}
